## Ethical Use of Home DNA Testing
#### McCombs School of Business, University of Texas at Austin
[https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/case-study/ethical-use-of-home-dna-testing](https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/case-study/ethical-use-of-home-dna-testing)

Home DNA testing is a booming business. Millions of Americans have sent their DNA to commercial testing companies such as 23andMe or Ancestry to learn more about their heritage or potential for disease. According to Grand View Research, "the global DNA testing market is set to reach over $10 billion by 2022."^[Amy Brown, “DNA Testing is Popular, But Many Are Unaware of Privacy Concerns,” TriplePundit, Dec. 18, 2018. https://www.triplepundit.com/story/2018/dna-testing-popular-many-are-unaware-privacy-concerns/55936] Successful marketing campaigns have led consumers to believe that home DNA testing is fun, informative, and personal to them. However, what consumers may not realize is that once their genetic information is shared, they have limited control as to who has access to it.

Regardless of the reason consumers decide to purchase a home DNA test kit, the information they provide to the testing company is far greater than the information they receive. The benefits that these testing companies can gain from gathering, using, and selling customers’ private information places them in a significant conflict-of-interest situation. Some of this information includes the IP address, name, address, email, and family history, collected from the application, as well as information provided on follow up surveys. Furthermore, according to its website, if customers opt to share their data for research, 23andMe could keep their physical spit sample and the genetic data it contains for up to a decade. Additional information that consumers upload to the companies’ genealogy website, such as pictures, obituaries, family relationships, and even third-party information is probably added to the pool of data linked to customers’ DNA.

Recently, some have felt that privacy and consumer rights have been violated when they used home DNA kits. In June 2019, Lori Collett sued Ancestry for allegedly misleading customers about what it was doing with their DNA. This class action lawsuit claims that personal information was released to outside parties without customer consent. Further contentions include that the waiver of consumer rights through consent forms is often vague, general in scope, and ever-changing. The fine print may not accurately spell out what the company, its third-party associates, and collaborators can or will do with customer information.^[Sara Merken, Áncestry.com Sued for ‘Misleading’ Customers About DNA Data,” Bloomberg Law, April 25, 2019. https://news.bloomberglaw.com/privacy-and-data-security/ancestry-com-sued-for-misleading-dna-data-handling-claims.]

Further concerns arise as testing companies often align themselves with pharmaceutical companies, public and private research organizations, and Google. For example, "GlaxoSmithKline purchased a $300 million stake in the company, allowing the pharmaceutical giant to use 23andMe’s trove of genetic data to develop new drugs — and raising new privacy concerns for consumers."^[Jamie Ducharme, “A Major Drug Company Now Has Access to 23andMe’s Genetic Data. Should You Be Concerned? Time, July 26, 2018.] Similarly, Ancestry is sharing its data with Google through its research subsidiary Calico. Ancestry admits that "once they share people’s genetic information with partner companies, they can’t be responsible for security protocols of those partners."^[Stuart Leavenworth, “The Secretive Google Subsidiary with Access to Ancestry’s DNA Database,” Financial Review, June 8, 2018. https://www.latimes.com/business/lazarus/la-fi-lazarus-dna-genetic-privacy-20190702-story.html]
